# Integrating Goals of Ongoing Harvest into Rebuilding Plans by Considering Species Interactions Within a Mixed-Stock Fishery

Fisheries management strategies must often achieve multiple, potentially competing goals such as optimizing the economic benefit of fisheries while ensuring the conservation and health of marine ecosystems. Ecosystem considerations such as multispecies interactions and environmental drivers of variability can improve the biological and economic outcomes of management decisions. As such, considering the ecosystem in which the species is a part of has become the new direction for fisheries management, known as Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management (EBFM). While efforts to advance EBFM have been longstanding, challenges to its implementation in marine fisheries management might arise as a result of the diverse assemblage of species occupying coastal marine waters. This diversity translates into differences in the rate of sustainable fishing between species, where managers become challenged with finding the balance between conserving less productive and utilizing more productive species in shared habitats. Federal and state fisheries management legislation include the goal of incorporating ecosystem-based approaches, where species interactions has been one crucial development to consider. However, strategies regarding conservation and maintenance of species have remained largely precautionary and single-species in nature. This is especially exemplified in rebuilding plans which are established to facilitate recovery of overfished populations to management target levels. This often entails limiting or prohibiting incidental and direct catch of the rebuilding species, which consequently may limit access to more productive species occupying shared habitat. Considering species interaction in rebuilding plans might have the potential to minimize the underutilization of productive fisheries while still achieving federally mandated rebuilding goals.

In this proposal, I seek to integrate goals of ongoing harvest into rebuilding plans by considering species interactions within a mixed-stock fishery, using the U.S. West Coast Groundfish Fishery as a relevant case study. As part of the rebuilding plans, expansive spatial closures known as Rockfish Conservation Areas (RCAs) were established along the coast from Washington to California to minimize incidental catch of recovering rockfish species. Of the 10 stocks placed under a rebuilding plan, all but yelloweye rockfish (**Sebastes ruberrimus**) have been declared rebuilt. 

I will evaluate the biological and management outcomes of a proposed ecosystem-based rebuilding plan for yelloweye rockfish. Specifically, I will ask:
1. Which ecological processes have the most influence on the long-term spawning biomass, age structure, and stability of yelloweye rockfish?
2. How does lingcod predation affect the long-term spawningbiomass, agestructure, and stability of yelloweye rockfish?
3. How will a lingcod fishery impact the biological and management outcomes of a yelloweye rockfish rebuilding plan?


